# Method definition vs. Method invocation

**Method definition** is when we define a method using the `def` keyword

```ruby
def greeting
	puts "Hello"
end
```

**Method invocation** is when we call a method.

```ruby
greeting # 'Hello'
```

```ruby
[1, 2, 3].each { |num| puts num }
```

Any method can be called with a block, but the block is only executed if the method is defined in a particular way.

The block is part of the method invocation, as the block acts as an argument to the method. In the same way that a local variable can be passed as an argument to a method at invocation, when a method is called with a block, the block acts as an argument to that method.

 * Some methods pass an argument to a block (e.g. `#times`) where others do not (`#loop`).

```ruby
5.times do |n| 
	p n 
end 
# 0 
# 1 
# 2 
# 3 
# 4
```

```ruby
loop do |block_param| 
	p block_param 
	break 
end 
# nil
```

- The difference in binding between `do..end` vs. `{}`

```ruby
array = [1, 2, 3] 
p array.map do |num| 
	num + 1 
end
# <Enumerator: [1, 2, 3]:map>
```

```ruby
array = [1,2,3] 
p array.map { |num| num + 1 }
# [2, 3, 4]
```

The block argument using `{}` binds more tightly to the `#map` method invocation than the block argument using `do..end` . If you run the two code snippets, you'll see the first returns an Enumerator, while the second returns an Array. https://docs.ruby-lang.org/en/3.2/Array.html#method-i-map

## Method Definition Order

When Ruby encounters a `def` statement, it merely reads the method definition into memory and saves it away to be executed later. The body of the method isn't executed until we actually call the method.

```ruby
def top
  bottom
end

def bottom
  puts "Reached the bottom"
end

top
```

By the time we try to invoke `top` on line 9, Ruby knows precisely what `top` and `bottom` are (methods), and what code they contain. Thus, when `top` tries to invoke `bottom`, all Ruby has to do is look up the definition of `bottom`, then invoke it if found. That means the code runs correctly even though `bottom` was defined after `top` was.

```ruby
top

def top
  bottom
end

def bottom
  puts "Reached the bottom"
end
```

This one fails with the error  `undefined local variable or method` error. The reason it doesn't work is that we're actually trying to invoke `top` on line 1, not just loading some code into memory. Since Ruby hasn't loaded the `top` and `bottom` methods into memory yet, it has no idea what `top` is, so it gives up.

The only rule of thumb is that you should define all your methods before you try to invoke the first one. This is why Rubyists almost always put the main program code at the bottom of the program after all methods have been declared.