# The Basics

## Ex1

Add two strings together that, when concatenated, return your first and last name as your full name in one string.

```ruby
puts "Ivan" + " Hernandez"
```

**Code Explanation**

On line 5, the `#+` method is called on the string object with the value `"Ivan"`, passing in the String object with the value `" Hernandez"` as an argument. The method invocation returns a new string object with the value `"Ivan Hernandez"` that is passed as an argument to the `puts` method invocation.

The output is `"Ivan Hernandez"`
The return value is `nil`

## Ex2

Use the modulo operator, division, or a combination of both to take a 4 digit number and find the digit in the: 1) thousands place 2) hundreds place 3) tens place 4) ones place

```ruby
def digits(num)
	num = num.to_s.chars.reverse
	result = ''

	num.each_index do |idx|
		result += "#{digit_2_position(idx)} place is #{num[idx]}\n"
	end
	result
end

def digit_2_position(digit)
	case digit
	when 0 then 'ones'
	when 1 then 'tens'
	when 2 then 'hundreds'
	when 3 then 'thousands'
	when 4 then 'ten thousands'
	when 5 then 'hundred thousands'
	when 6 then 'millions'
	when 7 then 'ten millions'
	when 8 then 'hundred millions'
	when 9 then 'billions'
	end
end

puts digits(2024)
```

**Code Explanation**

On line 29, the `digits` method is invoked and gets passed the Integer Object value `2024`.

From line 5-12 the `digits` method is defined. The Integer Object value `2024` is bound to the method parameter `num`.

On line 6 the `reverse` method is invoked on the returned value of the method invocation `chars` that is called on the returned value of the `to_s` method invocation of the Integer Object referenced by the method local variable `num`. The returned value is an array of characters is reverse order `["4", "2", "0", "2"]` that is reassigned to the variable `num`.

On line 7 the `result` variable is initialized with an empty string object.

On line 8, the `each_index` method is invoked on the array `num` and passed a `do..end` block as an argument. On each iteration, each index is passed into the block and is bound to block parameter `idx`.

On line 9, the method `digit_2_position` is invoked and gets passed the value referenced by the block argument `idx`.

From line 14 to 27, the method `digit_2_position` is defined. The argument `idx` is bound to the method parameter `digit`. From line 15 to 26 a case statement is defined. The result value of the `case` expression for the value referenced by the method local variable `digit`, in this case the integer object 4, is evaluated and the value String object `'ones'` is returned to the invocation of the `digits` method. The iteration continues until all elements of the array are looped over.

Back to line 9 of the `digits` method, the returned value `"ones"` is interpolated in the String object value `"#{digit_2_position(idx)}`. The expression `#{num[idx]}` is evaluated and returns the first element of the array `num`. The resulting String object is `"ones place is 4"` with carriage return, which is then concatenated and reassigned to the String value object referenced by variable `result`. The loop continues until all array elements are looped over. On line 11, the `result` variable is returned, which references a new string object.

Back to line 29, the `puts` method is invoked and gets passed the return value of the digits method invocation as an argument.

The output is:

`ones place is 4`
`tens place is 2`
`hundreds place is 0`
`thousands place is 2`

The return value is:
`"ones place is 4\ntens place is 2\nhundreds place is 0\nthousands place is 2\n"`

**Explanation by Mariah**

For the `digits` method in Example 2:  
On line 24, we have a chain of method calls. First, we call the `#to_s` method on the value referenced by method local variable `num`, which returns a new string object. We then call `#chars` on the return value from the `#to_s` method invocation, which returns a new array object with each character as an array element. Finally, we call `#reverse` on the array returned by `#chars`, which returns a new array with elements ordered in reverse. Method local variable `num` is re-assigned to reference the return value of the `#reverse` method call.On line 27 we invoke the `#each_index` method on the value referenced by `num` and pass a `do..end` block as an argument. On each iteration block local variable `idx` is bound to an index from the `num` array.  
From within the block on line 28:  

- `digit_2_position` is invoked with the value referenced by `idx` passed as an argument.
- the `#[]` method is called on the value of `num` with the value of `idx` passed as an argument.
- The return values from the `digit_2_position` and `num` method invocations are interpolated into a string.
- Method local variable `result` is re-assigned to the return value of invoking the `#+` method on the value referenced by `result` with a string passed as an argument.

On line 30, the object referenced by `result` is returned.

## Ex3

Write a program that uses a hash to store a list of movie titles with the year they came out. Then use the puts command to make your program print out the year of each movie to the screen.

```ruby
movies = {
	"The Shawshank Redemption" => 1994,
	"The Godfather" => 1972,
	"The Dark Knight" => 2008,
	"The Godfather Part 2" => 1974,
	"12 Angry Men" => 1957,
	"Schindler's List" => 1993
}

movies.each do |k, v|
	puts v
end
```

**Code Explanation**

On line 1, we initialized a variable `movies` that references a hash object with key/value pairs representing a movie and the year they were released.

On line 10, the `#each` method is called on the `movies` hash. A `do..end` block is passed as an argument to the `#each` method call. On each iteration, a key/value pair is passed into the block and bound to the block parameters `k, v`.

On line 11, on each iteration, the value referenced by the block local variable `v` is passed as an argument to the method invocation `puts` and the value is outputted. Since there are `6` key/value pairs in the `movies` hash, the iterator is executed 6 times outputting only the values: `1994, 1972, 2008, 1974, 1957, 1993`

The output is:
`1994
`1972
`2008
`1974
`1957
`1993`

The return value is the `movies` hash.


## Ex4

Use the dates from the previous example and store them in an array. Then make your program output the same thing as exercise 3.

```ruby
dates = [1994, 1972, 2008, 1974, 1957, 1993]

4
```

**Code Explanation**

On line 1, the `dates` variable is initialized and references the array object with values `[1994, 1972, 2008, 1974, 1957, 1993]`. 

On line 3, the `#each`method is called on the `dates` array. A block is passed as an argument of the `#each` method call. On each iteration, an element of the `dates`array is passed into the block and bound to the block parameter `date`, which is then passed as an argument to the `puts` method invocation. Each element of the `dates` array: `1994, 1972, 2008, 1974, 1957, 1993` is outputted.

The return value is the `dates` array.
## Ex5

Write a program that outputs the factorial of the numbers 5, 6, 7, and 8.

```ruby
def factorial(num)
	result = 1

	loop do
		result *= num
		num -= 1
		break if num == 0
	end
	result
end

puts factorial(5) #=> 120
#puts factorial(6) #=> 720
#puts factorial(7) #=> 5040
#puts factorial(8) #=> 40320
```

**Code Explanation**

On line 12, the `factorial` method is invoked and gets passed the Integer Object with value `5` as an argument.

From line 1-10 the `factorial` method is defined. 

On line 1, the Integer Object `5`is bound to the method parameter `num`.

On line 2, the `result` variable is initialized and references the Integer Object with value `1`.

From line 3-7 a loop method is invoked and gets passed a `do..end` block as an argument. Upon each iteration of the loop, the `#*` method is invoked on the value referenced by the `result` variable and gets passed the current value referenced by the variable `num`. The return value is then reassigned to the `result` variable. Then the `num` variable is decremented by `1`, then terminate the loop if the value of `num` variable is `0`. Because the original value of the `num`variable is `5`, the loop will be executed `5` times. After the loop execution the `result` variable will be returned referencing the value `120` and outputted, as it gets passed as an argument to the `puts` method invocation.

The return value is `nil`

**Explanation from Mariah**

On line 145, the `#loop` method is invoked and passed a `do..end` block as an argument. From within the block on line 146, block local variable `result` is re-assigned to the return value of invoking the `#*` on the value of `result` with the value referenced by local variable `num` as an argument.  
On line 147, local variable `num` is re-assigned to the return value of invoking the `#-` method on the value referenced by `num` with `1` passed as an argument. On line 148, we exit the `loop` method using `break` when the expression `num == 0` evaluates as `true`.
## Ex6

Write a program that calculates the squares of 3 float numbers of your choosing and outputs the result to the screen.

```ruby
def square(num)
	num * num
end

puts square(3.14) #=> 9.8596
#puts square(14.11) #=> 199.0921
#puts square(0.25) #=> 0.0625
```

**Code Explanation**

On line 5, the `square` method is invoked and gets passed the Integer Object with value `3.14`. 

On line 1-3, the `square` method is defined. 

On line 1, the the Integer Object `3.14` is bound to the method parameter `num`.

On line 2, the method `#*` is invoked on the value referenced by the method local variable `num` and gets passed the same local variable `num` as an argument. Since is the last expression evaluated in the method, the value of the `#*` method invocation is returned and gets passed as an argument to the `puts` method, which outputs the value `9.8596`.

The return value is `nil`.

