# Arrays

## Ex1

Below we have given you an array and a number. Write a program that checks to see if the number appears in the array.

```ruby
arr = [1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11]
number = 3

puts arr.include?(number)
```

**Code Explanation**

On line 1, a variable `arr` is initialized and references the array object `[1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11]`

On line 2, a variable `number` is initialized and references an integer object with value `3`

On line 5, the `include?` method is called on the array object referenced by the variable `arr` and gets passed the integer object value referenced by variable `number`. The method invocation returns the boolean value `true` as the integer `3` is an element in the array, which is then passed as an argument to the `puts` method invocation, outputting it to the console.

## Ex2

What will the following programs return? What is the value of arr after each?

```ruby
arr = ["b", "a"]
arr = arr.product(Array(1..3))
arr.first.delete(arr.first.last)

  
arr = ["b", "a"]
arr = arr.product([Array(1..3)])
arr.first.delete(arr.first.last)
```

On line 1, the variable `arr` is initialized and references an array object with elements `"b", "a"`.

On line 2,  the `Array`method is called to create a new array and gets passed a range object `(1..3)` as an argument, which returns an array object which elements are `[1, 2, 3]`. This array object is then passed as an argument to the `product` method invocation on the array `arr`. The return value is a new array with subarrays as elements representing the combination of elements from both arrays, which is then re-assigned to the `arr` variable.

On line 3, the `first`method is called on the array `arr`, returning the first subarray. The `delete`method is called on the subarray and gets passed the last element of the first subarray of the array `arr` , deleting that element from the subarray, mutating it.

The return value is `1`.



