# The Basics

## Literals

* **A literal** is any notation that lets you represent a fixed value in source code.
* These are all the literals in Ruby:

```ruby
'Hello, world!'          # string literal
375                      # integer literal
3.141528                 # float literal
true                     # boolean literal
{ 'a' => 1, 'b' => 2 }   # hash literal
[ 1, 2, 3 ]              # array literal
:sym                     # symbol literal
nil                      # nil literal
(1..2)                   # range including its ending value
(1...2)                  # excludes its ending value
(1..)                    # endless range, from 1 to infinity
(..1)                    # beginless range, from -Infinity to 1
```

## Strings

- **A String** is a list of characters in a specific sequence. Is a collection.
- String [**literals**](#Literals) are either single quotes `'hi'` or double quotes `"hi"` 
- To include single quotes within your string you can:
	- use double quotes
	- use single quotes with escaping. The backslash, or escape (`\`) character, tells the computer that the quotes that follow it are not meant as Ruby syntax but only as simple quote characters to be included in the string.

```ruby
# Ex. 1: with double quotes
"The man said, 'Hi there!'"

# Ex. 2: with single quotes and escaping
'The man said, \'Hi there!\''
```

- **String interpolation** allows you to merge Ruby code with strings. The returned expression will be concatenated with the string. Is allowed only with double quotes.

```ruby
a = 10
"my favorite number is #{a}"
```

- **Strings** are **mutable**

## Symbols

- are used when you want to reference something like a string but don't ever intend to print it to the screen or change it.
- Are **immutable**. 
- Symbols literals are `:`

```ruby
# Examples of symbols
:name
:a_symbol
:"surprisingly, this is also a symbol"
```

## Numbers

- **Integer**
- **Float**

```ruby
# Example of integer literals
1, 2, 3, 50, 10, 4345098098

# Example of float literals
1.2345, 2345.4267, 98.2234
```

## nil

- express "nothing" 
- A variable with a value of `nil` could be described as having 'nothing' or being 'completely empty', or even just simply 'not any specific type'.
- literal `nil`
- To check if something is of type `nil` use the literal `.nil?`
- `nil` is **falsy** 

```shell
irb :001 > puts "Hello, World!" 
Hello, World! 
=> nil
```
## Operations

### Adding, Subtracting, and Multiplying Integers

- `1 + 1` => 2
- `1 - 1` => 0
- `4 * 4` => 16

### Division vs. Modulo

- `16 / 4` => 4 (When dividing integers an integer is returned)
- `16 % 5` => 1 (Only with positive integers)
- In modulo expressions, the value to the left of the `%` is called the **dividend**, and the value to the right is called the **modulus**.

### Modulo vs. Remainder

- The `#remainder` method computes and returns the remainder of an integers division operation: `16.remainder(5)` => 1
- The `#divmod` method computes both the integer result of the division and its modulo value: `16.divmod(5)` => [3, 1]

### Multiplying and Dividing Floats

- `15.0 / 4` => 3.75 (Whenever a float is used in an operation a float is returned)
- `9.75 * 4.32` => 42.120000000005

### Equality Comparison

- To test for equality use the `==` operator ("is equal to" or "equal equal")
- It returns a boolean value (`true` or `false` )

### String Concatenation

- use the `+` operator to join two strings together.

## Type Conversion

- to convert a `String` to a `Integer` use method `to_i`
- to convert a `String`to a `Float` use method `to_f`
- to convert `Integers` and `Floats` to a `String` use method `to_s`
- Examples:

```ruby
p "1".to_i #=> 1
p "2.0".to_f #=> 2.0
p "a".to_i #=> 0
p "a".to_f #=> 0.0
p 1.to_s #=> "1"
p (1..2).to_s #=> "1..2"
p "1.5".to_i #=> 1
p "1".to_f #=> 1.0
```

## Basic Data Structures

### Arrays

- is used to organize information into an ordered list.
- the list can be made up of any data type.
- **Literal** is denoted by square brackets `[]` 
- Each element in the array can be accessed via an index, starting at zero.

### Hashes

- Also referred as dictionary, is a set of key-value pairs.
- **Literal** is represented by curly braces `{}` 
- Key is usually represented by a [symbol](#Symbols) that points to a value (using `=>`) of any data type.
- Keys can be of any type and the literal changes to => to point to the value
- Have no order



## Expressions and Return

- `=>` is called a *hash rocket*
- an **expression** is anything that can be evaluated and almost everything in Ruby is an expression.
- An **expression** in Ruby always returns something (even an error or `nil`)

## [[18.output_vs_return|puts vs return]]

- The `puts` method prints something to the screen and returns `nil`
- **Expressions** do something and **return** something. The value returned is not necessarily the action that was performed.