# Mutating vs. Non-mutating methods

## Methods with a `!`

* The bang suffix (`!`) at the end of the method name usually indicates that the method will change (or mutate) the caller permanently. Unfortunately this is not always the case.
* Also, please note that there are methods like `pop` and `push` that are destructive, but do not have a `!` at the end.

## Mutating the Caller and Arguments

* it is possible that a method can unexpectedly change an object used as the caller or as an argument.

```ruby
def mutate(arr)
  arr.pop
end

def not_mutate(arr)
  arr.select { |i| i > 3 }
end

a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
mutate(a)
not_mutate(a)

puts a
```

The `mutate` method performed a destructive action (i.e., `pop`) on its argument, thereby modifying the `a` array, even though `a` was initialized outside of the method. The `not_mutate` method performed a non-destructive action (i.e., `select`), and therefore the original variable was unmodified. It's worth noting that inside `mutate`, `arr.pop` mutates its caller. That, in turn, mutates the argument passed to `mutate`. However, inside `not_mutate`, `arr.select` does not mutate its caller, so `not_mutate` doesn't mutate its argument either.

* Mutating the caller is similar to mutating arguments, but applies to the object used to call a method. For instance, in `array.pop`, the array specified by `array` is used to call the `pop` method. The difference is that mutating an argument alters the value of an object passed to a method as an argument, while mutating the caller modifies the object used to call the method.*

[Mutating and Non-mutating methods](https://launchschool.medium.com/ruby-objects-mutating-and-non-mutating-methods-78023d849a5f)

