# Variables

- used to store information to be referenced and manipulated in a computer program.
- provide a way of labeling data so programs can be understood
- are containers that hold information.
- their purpose is to label and store data in memory.

## Assigning Value to Variables

- `=` assignment operator
- Variables point to values in memory and are not deeply linked to each other. 

Example:

```ruby
a = 4
b = a
a = 7
puts a => 7
puts b => 4
```

## Getting data from a User

- `gets` method stands for "get string". Is used to capture input from a user.
- the value returned by `gets` contains a `\n` "newline" character that represents the enter key
- the `gets.chomp` method removes that `\n` character.

## Variable Scope

- A variable's scope determines where in a program a variable is available for use.
- It's defined by where the variable is initialized or created.
- Variable scope if defined by **method definition** or by a **block**.

### [[5.local_variable_scope_methods|Variable Scope and Method Definitions]]

- Methods have self-contained scope. Only variables initialized within the method's body can be referenced or modified from within the method's body and aren't available outside the method's body.

### [[6.local_variable_scope_blocks|Variable Scope and Blocks]]

- A block is a piece of code that follows a **method's invocation**, delimited be either curly braces `{}` or `do/end`:

```ruby
total = 0
[1, 2, 3].each { |number| total += number }
puts total # 6
```

```ruby
total = 0
[1, 2, 3].each do |number|
  total += number
end
puts total # 6
```

- In both cases, the code can access and modify variables that are defined outside of the block. Any variables initialized inside the block (`number`) can't be accessed by the outer scope.
- **Inner scope can access variables initialized in an outer scope, but not vice versa.**

## Types of Variables

- **Constants**:
	- declared by capitalizing every letter in the variable's name. Ruby does not stop you from changing it.
- **Global variables**:
	- declared by starting the variable name with the dollar sign (`$`)
	- They are available throughout the entire app, overriding all scope boundaries.
- **Class variables**:
	- declared by starting the variable name with two `@` signs.
	- They are accessible by instances of your class, as well as the class itself.
- **Instance Variables**:
	- declared by starting the variable name with one `@`sign.
	- They are available throughout the current instance of the parent class.
	- Can cross some scope boundaries, but not all of them.
- **Local Variables**:
	- Obey all scope boundaries.
	- are declared by starting the variable name with neither `$` nor `@`, as well as not capitalizing the entire variable name.