# Loops & Iterators

- A **loop** is the repetitive execution of a piece of code for a given amount of repetitions or until a certain condition is met.

## A Simple Loop

- `loop` method: takes a block as an argument, which is denoted by `{...}` or `do ... end` and executes any code within the block until a `break` statement is found.
- **The block in the `loop` method introduces a new scope**. From inside the block, you can access and change variables that were initialized outside of the block. From outside the block, you can't access any variables that were initialized inside the block.

## Controlling Loop Execution

- The `break` keyword allows us to exit a loop at any point.
- The `next` keyword allows us to skip the rest of the current iteration and start executing the next iteration.

```ruby
i = 0
loop do
  i = i + 2
  if i == 4
    next        # skip rest of the code in this iteration
  end
  puts i
  if i == 10
    break
  end
end
```

## While Loops

- A **while loop** is given a parameter that evaluates as either true or false.
- Once that expression becomes false, or a `break` statement is found, the while loop is not executed again, and the program continues after the while loop.
- **unlike the `loop` method, `while` is not implemented as a method. One consequence of this difference is, that unlike `loop`, a `while` loop does not have its own scope -- the entire body of the loop is in the same scope as the code that contains the `while` loop**

```ruby
x = gets.chomp.to_i

while x >= 0
  puts x
  x -= 1 # <- refactored this line
end

puts "Done!"
```

## Until Loops

- The until loop is simply the opposite of the while loop.
- **`until` is not a method. Therefore, `until` loops do not have their own scope.**

```ruby
x = gets.chomp.to_i

until x < 0
  puts x
  x -= 1
end

puts "Done!"
```

## Do/While Loops

- The code within the loop gets executed one time, prior to the conditional check to see if the code should be executed.
- Ruby doesn't have a built-in "do/while" loops so we have to use `loop` and `break` to emulate it.

```ruby
loop do
  puts "Do you want to do that again?"
  answer = gets.chomp
  if answer != 'Y'
    break
  end
end
```

Side note: there's also another construct in Ruby that supports "do/while" loops, like this:

```ruby
begin
  puts "Do you want to do that again?"
  answer = gets.chomp
end while answer == 'Y'
```
## For Loops

- **for loops** are used to loop over a collection of elements.
- the loop returns the collection of elements after it executes, whereas the while loop return `nil` .
- **`for` is not implemented as a method, so it does not have its own scope.**

```ruby
x = gets.chomp.to_i

for i in 1..x do
  puts x - i
end

puts "Done!"
```

## Iterators

- **Iterators** are methods that naturally loop over a given set of data and allow you to operate on each element in the collection.

```ruby
names = ['Bob', 'Joe', 'Steve', 'Janice', 'Susan', 'Helen']

names.each { |name| puts name }
```

- What this method does is loop through each element in our array, in order.
- Then it begins executing the code within the block. The block's starting and ending points are defined by the curly braces `{}`.
- Each time we iterate over the array, we need to assign the value of the element to a variable and placed it in between two pipes `|`.
- After that, we write the logic that we want to use to operate on the variable, which represents the current array element.
- A **block** is just some lines of code ready to be executed.
- we use the curly braces (`{}`) when everything can be contained in one line. We use the words `do` and `end` when we are performing multi-line operations.

```ruby
names = ['Bob', 'Joe', 'Steve', 'Janice', 'Susan', 'Helen']
x = 1

names.each do |name|
  puts "#{x}. #{name}"
  x += 1
end
```

## Recursion

- Recursion is the act of calling a method from within itself.
- The key concept with recursion is that there is some baseline condition that returns a value, which then "unwinds" the recursive calls. You can think of the successive recursive calls building up, until some value is returned, and only then can the recursive calls be evaluated.

```ruby
def fibonacci(number)
  if number < 2
    number
  else
    fibonacci(number - 1) + fibonacci(number - 2)
  end
end

puts fibonacci(6)
```
