# Explaining Ruby Code (Writing and Speaking)

## Precision of Language

* Say **method definition** or **method invocation / method call**
* Talk about **output, return value and mutations**
* A value is assigned to a variable
* Use **evaluates as true** or **is truthy** when discussing expressions that evaluate to `true` in a Boolean context
* Use **is true** or **is equal to true** only when talking about Boolean `true`
* Be concise
* Divide your answers in paragraphs
* Say `a` is initialized and the value `hello` is assigned to it
* Distinguish between method parameters and arguments: a method is defined with parameters but it is called with arguments.

### Key Passive Verbs

Below are the main verbs you need to concisely read Ruby code in English. It’s important to note — using these only becomes easy when you learn to read **right to left.** In the examples listed below, these verbs are **bolded** for emphasis.

- **is invoked / is called**
- **is initialized**
- **is reassigned**
- **is passed**
- **is returned**
- **is mutated**
- **is referenced**
- **is evaluated**
- **is chained**
- **is bound**

### Helpful Active Verbs

- _passes_ — a method _passes_ an element into a block
- _returns_ — a block _returns_ a value to a method
- _mutates_ — a method _mutates_ the calling object
- _references_ — a variable _references_ an object
- _binds_ — an object _binds_ to a parameter

Most of the time, passive voice works equally well:

- an element **is passed** into a block
- a value **is returned** by a block
- a calling object **is mutated** by a method
- an object **is referenced** by a variable
- an object **is bound** to a parameter
## Basic Terminology

### Variable initialization vs reassignment

The first instance in which a variable is assigned a value, that variable gets **initialized**. Any following assignment is a **reassignment**.

```ruby
a = 'Hello World!' # => Initialization
b = a
a = 'Goodbye!' # => Reassignment
```

*Code Explanation*:

On line 1, local variable `a` is **initialized** and references the string object `"Hello World!"`. On line 2, local variable `b` is **initialized** and references the same object as `a`. On line 3, `a` is **reassigned** to the string object `"Goodbye!"`.

### Method invocation

A method is called on an object when it appears after the object, usually (but not always) prepended by a dot.

```ruby
"hello world!".upcase
```

*Code Explanation:*

The `upcase` method **is called** on the string object `"hello world!"`.

An object gets passed into a method invocation when the object appears after the method, usually (but not always) delimited by parentheses.

```ruby
puts 'hello world!'
```

*Code Explanation:*

The `puts` method **is invoked** and gets passed the string object `"hello world!"` as an argument.

### Arguments vs parameters

Arguments are objects that get passed into a method, only at the method invocation. Parameters are placeholder variables that allow the arguments to be used within the method.

```ruby
def say(string)
	puts string
end

say('hello')
```

*Code Explanation:*

The `say` method is **invoked** and gets passed the string object `"hello"` as an **argument**, which is then **bound** to the method's **parameter** `string`.

### Return vs output

A method will always return a value, but may not always output one. An outputted value gets printed to the console.

```ruby
puts ['a', 'b', 'c'].pop
```

*Code Explanation:*

The `pop` method is called on the array object `['a', 'b', 'c']`, which removes and **returns** the last element `'c'`. `'c'` is then passed as an argument to the `puts` method, **outputting** it to the console.

### True vs truthy

Everything in Ruby evaluates as `true` which doesn't mean is the Boolean `true`, except for `false` and `nil`. 

```ruby
if 5 > 1
	puts '5 is greater than 1'
end
```

*Code Explanation:*

Because `5 > 1` **evaluates as true**, the string object `5 is greater than 1 `is output.


## Basic Rules

### Say it once

Once you explain what an object is or what a method does, there is no need to explain it again.

```ruby
a = 1
b = 2
```

*Code Explanation:*

On line 1, local variable `a` is initialized and referenced an integer object with the value `1`. On line 2, `a` is reassigned to `2`.

### Use markdown to refer to code objects

### When in doubt, more is better

## Examples

### Example 1

```ruby
"earlobe.chars"
array_of_letters_in_the_word_earlobe = "earlobe".chars
```

*Code Explanation:*

**Passive voice:** 
The `#chars` method **is called on** a string object with value `"earlobe"`.
Local variable `array_of_letters_in_the_word_earlobe` **is initialized** to reference the return value of the `#chars` method call.

Right to left reading using passive verbs makes it simple to explain even complex nested iterative structures containing multiple method calls and return values.

**Active voice:** We are calling the `#chars` method on the string object `"earlobe"`. We initialized the variable `array_of_letters_in_the_word_earlobe` with the reference of the return value of calling the method `#chars` on the string object `"earlobe"`.

### Example 2

```ruby
number = 5

if number > 0
	puts 'This is a postive integer'
end
```

*Code Explanation:*

On line 1, local variable `number` is initialized and references the integer object `5`. On line 3, an `if` statement is employed, which checks the truthiness of `number > 0`. Because this evaluates as true, the `puts` method is invoked and gets passed `This is a positive integer.` as an argument, outputting it to the console.

### Example 3

```ruby
def add_5(number)
	number + 5
end

a = 5
p add_5(a)
```

*Code Explanation:*

On line 5, local variable `a`is initialized and references the integer object `5`. On line 6, the `add_5`method is invoked and gets passed `a` as an argument, binding its value to the method's parameter `number`. Within the method, the `+` method evaluates the sum of `number` and `5`, returning the integer `10`. Because this is the last line of the method, `10` is returned from `add_5` and gets passed as an argument to the `p` method invocation, outputting it to the console.

### Example 4

Why does the below code output `Hello` rather than `Goodbye`?

```ruby
def greet(greeting)
	return 'Hello'
	greeting
end

str = 'Goodbye'
puts greet(str)
```

*Code Explanation:*

The following code outputs `Hello` due to the explicit `return` command on line 2. When used within a method, the method immediately terminates at the location of the command, returning its argument value. In this case `Hello` is returned from `greet` and output by the invocation of the `puts` method.

### Example 5

What will the below code output and why?

```ruby
def countdown(starting_num)
	loop do
		puts starting_num
		starting_num -= 1
		break if starting_num == 0
	end
	puts 'Blast off!'
end

countdown(3)
```

*Code Explanation:*

On line 11, the `countdown` method is invoked and gets passed the integer `3` as an argument, binding it to the method's parameter `starting_num`. Within the method, the `loop` method is called and gets passed a `do..end` block as an argument, creating a loop from lines 3-5. Upon each iteration of the loop, the current value of `starting_num` will output, decrement by `1`, then terminate the loop of its value is `0`. Because its original value is `3`, the loop will execute 3 times, outputting `3`, `2`, `1`, followed by `Blast off!` from the `puts` method invocation on line 8.

### Example 6

What does the below code output and why?

```ruby
str = 'cat'

def say
	str = 'meow'
end

puts str
```

*Code Explanation:*

The following code outputs `cat`. This is due to variable scoping rules in regards to methods, which states that methods have their own, self-contained scope that cannot access local variables initialized outside of it, not the other way around. Because both `str` local variables are located within different scopes of the `say` method, they are considered different variables. The `str` on line 7 is outside of the method's scope, and therefore references the value assigned on line 1.

### Example 7

```ruby:n
def question(string)
	string += '?'
	string.downcase!
end

example_string = 'Today is Monday'

question(example_string)

puts example_string
```

On Line 6 local variable `example_string` **is initialized** to reference a string with value `Today is Monday`. 

On Line 8 the `question` method **is invoked** and the string object **referenced** by `example_string` **is passed** in as an argument. The `question` method **is defined** on lines 1-4. The string object **passed** in as an argument **is bound** to method parameter `string`.

On Line 1, the `#+` method **is called** on the string **referenced** by method local variable `string`. This method call **is passed** string object `?` as an argument, `#+` is a non-destructive method -- when it's called, it created and modifies a copy of the string it's called on.

Here, the method call concatenates `?` to the end of the string object **referenced** by `string` and *returns* the new string object `"Today is Monday?"`.  (Active verbs italicized -- here the method is actually doing something.) The method local variable `string` **is reassigned** to reference this new string object. 

(Notice this description on line 2 is starting in the middle, focused on what is happening with the `#+` method. The method is doing something, so that’s our starting point. Once that action on the right is complete, we then move left and describe the reassignment. Explaining the method call before the reassignment helps you avoid getting stuck when trying to describe what the reassignment is referencing.)

On line 3, the mutating `#downcase!` method **is called** on the object **referenced** by `string`. This method *converts* all letters in a string to their lowercase version. Since this method call is the last evaluated expression in the method, the method's return value is `today is monday?`.

The method's return value is a different string object than the object initially **passed** into the method as an argument. The non-mutating method call on line 2 *creates* a copy of the original string. Everything else that happens in the method happens to that copy, not the original string.

On line 10 the `#puts` method **is invoked** and **passed** the object **referenced** by local variable `example_string`. This line *outputs* the original string object, with no mutations - `"Today is Monday"`.

This code demonstrates the concept of pass by value. When the argument is initially **passed** into the method, both `example_string` and `string` reference the same string object. However, on line 2 in the method's body a copy **is created**, and the code within the method only affects the copy, not the original object.

### Example 8

```ruby
selected_foods = [['apple', 'kiwi'], ['artichoke', 'broccoli']].select do |arr|
					arr.select do |food|
						food.start_with?('a')
					end
				end
p selected_foods
```

On line 1 the `#select` method **is called** on a nested array. A `do..end` block **is passed** as an argument to the `#select` method call. On each iteration, a subarray **is passed** into the block and **is bound** to block parameter `arr`.

On line 2, the `#select` method **is called** on the subarray **referenced** by block local variable `arr`. The inner `#select` **is passed** a `do..end` block as an argument. On each iteration, one subarray **is passed** into the block and **is bound** to block parameter `food`.

On line 3, the `#start_with?` method **is invoked** on the string object **referenced** by block local variable `food`, and **passed** string object `a` as an argument. On each iteration, this method call *evaluates* the calling object and *returns* a Boolean: `true` if the string begins with `a`, `false` if it doesn't.

`#select` *works* by selecting those objects for which the block iteration *returns* a truthy value and returning them in a new array. (in this case, the inner `#select` will return `['apple']` and ignore `['kiwi']`, which returns `false`. On the second iteration, it will again return `['artichoke']` and ignore `['broccoli']`).

The arrays **returned** by the inner `#select` become the block return values for the outer `#select`. Since each of these returned new arrays has a truthy value, each iteration of the outer `#select` block will return `true`. The entire subarray **is selected** and **returned** in a new nested array. On line 1 local variable `selected_foods` **is initialized** to reference the return values of this nested iteration.

On line 7 the `#p` method **is invoked** and **passed** the nested array **referenced** by `selected_foods` as an argument. This method call both outputs and returns a copy of the original nested array. 

The code demonstrates the importance of understanding ow block return values are used to perform selection on collection objects.

### Tips

* Don’t repeat yourself. If you’re describing a block or an iterative structure (like each, select, map, or times), take a bird’s eye view. You’ll waste time and run in circles if you find yourself trying to describe each iteration. Instead step back and verbalize what the iterative structure as a whole is doing.
* Consider whether you’re describing actions being performed by the interpreter (and use passive voice) or by some part of the code (and use active voice). A good rule of thumb: if you can identify who’s responsible for the action, active voice works. If not, default to passive. (What reassigns a variable? Interpreter. Passive. What passes a return value back to a method? A block. Active works.)
* Focus on one method call at a time.
* Try to keep sentences short — one method call, assignment, etc., per sentence helps writing stay clear.
* Use terminology to demonstrate your knowledge, but don’t let it trap you. Saying, “The string object with value `'hello'` referenced by block local variable `string` ..." the first time you encounter the object demonstrates you know how to describe that object. Feeling compelled to use that phrase every single time you refer back to it will make your writing lengthy, time-consuming to write, and harder to read. Once you've demonstrated your knowledge, calling it `'hello'` is fine as long as the context is clear.
* Methods are king. Methods are doing all the heavy lifting, and the method should take precedence in descriptions. A method **is called on** a variable, and **is passed** an argument. As much as possible, orient sentences around describing what the method calls are doing — assignment, reassignment, and argument passing are often happening in response to the method call.
* Integrate descriptions as you go. If you look back at Example 3 above, you can see how explanation is woven is:

	* On line 1 the `#select` method is called on a nested array. A `do...end` block is passed as an argument to the `#select` method call. **On each iteration, a subarray is passed into the the block and is bound to block parameter** `**arr**` **.** On line 2, the `#select` method is called on the subarray **referenced** by block local variable `arr`...

	* Of these four sentences, three are reading the code. The bolded sentence is explanation dropped in at a convenient breaking point, before starting on the next section of code. Explanation can be incorporated like this, but if it’s easier you can also hold off and instead describe at the end.

	* Opting for the incorporated method helps keeps thoughts organized and leads to a shorter description, but it might take a little extra work at first to jump back and forth between reading code and explaining code.

## Sources

[Speaking in Ruby]([Speaking in Ruby. Grammar tips for reading Ruby aloud —… | by Rebecca Biancofiore | Medium](https://medium.com/@rebeccabiancofiorecw/speaking-in-ruby-caabc4f1adf6))
[The art of speaking like a Ruby programmer](https://medium.com/@derek.novak1/the-art-of-speaking-like-a-ruby-programmer-cfc321bf3157)








