# Questions I have?

### What are the Ruby Data Types?

Hello everyone!,

I am trying to list the Primitive Data Types in Ruby to identify which ones are mutable and which ones are not and realized that is not clear to me which are even the data types in Ruby. 

The following types are mentioned everywhere in the material and I believe are clear to me: Strings, Booleans, Arrays, Hashes and Symbols.

But what about Number? Is safe to say that Numbers is a type and Integers/Floats/Rational/Complex are "subtypes" of Numbers? or each of them is a type?.

Are `nil` and `range` also types?

I've invoked the `class` method on each "value" but I am not sure if this is the right way to determined the type of a value:

```ruby
p 1.class # => Integer
p 3.14.class # => Float
p nil.class # => NilClass
p (1..2).class # => Range
p true.class # => TrueClass (not Bool)
p false.class # => FalseClass (not Bool)
```

I couldn't find any explicit answer in the material and I am not sure if this is relevant at all. 

I did spend some time googling and I got confused because there were some explanations about Ruby not really using Types by Duck-Typing (and I have no idea what that is), so I stopped :) 

Any guidance would be appreciated.

## ### Example 3 (Clarify with TA)

```ruby
n = 101.times do |n|
	n = 11
end

puts n
```

they are demonstrating that the top level/main `n` variable is never accessed within the `times` block because the block variable `n` blocks access to that outer variable, due to variable shadowing.

So during each iteration, when `n` is assigned to `11`, that is only affecting the block variable `n`, not the top level/main `n` variable. As you said, the top level/main `n` is initialized and assigned the return value of the `times` method after its block execution is completed.

The way I like to think of variable shadowing is that it's the compiler's way of deciding which variable to access when there are potentially two variables with the same name in the same scope. By default it chooses to access the variable in the innermost scope.So variable shadowing is definitely happening in the example, because the `n` in `n = 11` could conceivably refer to either the `n` initialized in the outer scope, or the `n` initialized in the inner scope of the block and reassigned to `11` on each iteration of the `#times` method. The compiler treats the reference to `n` as the latter due to variable shadowing.But as Joshua and Will said, it's not really a helpful or intuitive example of the concept, and if you haven't already, I'd encourage you to leave feedback on that page so it can be improved.










