# Local variable scope in relation to method definitions

## Variable Scope

* Determines when a program variable is available for use.
* Is defined by where the variable is initialized or created.

## Variable Scope and Method Definitions

* Methods have self-contained scope. That means that only variables initialized within the method's body can be referenced or modified from within the method's body.
* These variables aren't available outside the method's body.
* Methods can only access variables that were initialized inside the method or that are defined as parameters.
* A method definition has no notion of "outer" or "inner" scope, you must explicitly pass in any parameters to a method definition.
* local variables that are not initialized inside a method definition must be defined as parameters.

### Rule 1: a method definition can't access local variables in another scope

```ruby
a = 'hi'

def some_method
	puts a
end

some_method #=> NameError: undefined local variable or method `a' for main:Object
```

### Rule 2: a method definition can access objects passed in

```ruby
def some_method(a)
	puts a
end

some_method(5) # => 5
```

The integer `5` is passed into `some_method` as an argument, assigned to the method parameter `a` and made available to the method body as a local variable.

```ruby
hello = 'hi'

def hello
	"Saying hello!"
end

puts hello
```

If the local variable and a method have the same name, Ruby first search for the local variable, if it is not found, then tries to find a method with the given name. If not found, a `NameError` message will be thrown. 

If we want to make sure the `hello` method is invoked, use `hello()`. There is no equivalent for explicitly referring to a local variable, the only solution would be to choose a different name for the variable and method.

