# Variables

## Ex1

Write a program that asks the user to type in their name and then prints out a greeting message with their name included.

```ruby
puts "What is your name?"
name = gets.chomp

puts "Hi! #{name}"
```

**Code Explanation**

On line 1,  the `puts` method is invoked and gets passed the String value `"What is your name?"` as an argument.

On line 2, we ask for user input by calling the `gets` method, which returns a string object value with a newline character `\n` at the end. The `chomp` method is then called on the string object value returned by the `gets` method and removes the newline character `\n`, returning a new string object. The local variable `name` is initialized to reference the return value returned by the `chomp` method call.

On line 4, the value referenced by local variable `name` is interpolated into the string `"Hi! #{name}"`, and passed as an argument to the `puts` method invocation, outputting it to the console.


## Ex2

Write a program that asks a user how old they are and then tells them how old they will be in 10, 20, 30 and 40 years

```ruby
puts "How old are you?"
age = gets.chomp.to_i

time = 0

4.times do
	time += 10
	puts "In #{time} years you will be #{age + time}"
end
```

**Code Explanation**

On line 1, the `puts` method is invoked and gets passed the string object value `"How old are you?"` outputting it to the console.

On line 2, we ask for user input by invoking the `gets` method, which returns a string object with an appended new line character `\n`. The `chomp` method is called on the return value of the `gets` method invocation, removing the `\n` character and returning a new string object. The `to_i` method is invoked on the return value of the `chomp` method invocation, returning the result of interpreting the string object as an integer object value. The local variable `age` is initialized to reference the return value of the `to_i` method invocation.

On line 4, the local variable `time` is initialized to the integer object value `0`.

On line 6, the `times` method is invoked on the integer object value `4` and gets passed a `do..end` block as an argument. From within the block and on each iteration (4 in total), the local variable `time` is re-assigned to the return value of invoking the `#+` method on the value of `time` with the value of the integer object `10`.

On line 8, the value referenced by the `time` variable is interpolated into a string, as well as the returning value of the expression `age + time`. After 4 iterations, the `loop` exits.
## Ex3

Add another section onto ex1 that prints the name of the user 10 times.

```ruby
puts "What is your name?"
name = gets.chomp

10.times { puts "Hi! #{name}" }
```

**Code Explanation**

On line 1, the `puts` method is invoked and gets passed the string object with value `"What is your name?` and outputting it into the console.

On line 2, we capture user input by calling the `gets` method, which returned value contains a newline character `\n`. The `chomp` method is called on the return value of `gets` method and returns a new string object with the newline character `\n` removed. The local variable `name` is initialized to the return value of the `chomp` method invocation.

On line 4, the `times` method is invoked on the integer object `10` and gets passed a `{ }` block as an argument. Within the block and on each iteration (10 in total), the value referenced by the `name` variable is interpolated into a string and the return string object gets passed as an argument to the `puts` method invocation, outputting it 10 times into the console. ``
## Ex4

Modify ex3 again so that it first asks the user for their first name, saves it into a variable, and then does the same for the last name. Then outputs their full name all at once.

```ruby
puts "What is your first name?"
first_name = gets.chomp

puts "What is your last name?"
last_name = gets.chomp

puts "Hi! #{first_name} #{last_name}"
```

**Code Explanation**


