# Flow Control

## Ex1

Write a method that takes a string as an argument. The method should return a new, all-caps version of the string, only if the string is longer than 10 characters.

```ruby
def all_caps10(string)
	string.size > 10 ? string.upcase : string
end

string = "hello world"
puts all_caps10(string)
```

**Code Explanation**

On line 5, variable `string` is initialized and references the string object with value `"hello world"` .

On line 6, the `all_caps10` method is invoked and gets passed the string value referenced by variable `string`.

From line 1 -3, the method `all_caps10` is defined. The string `"hello world"` is bound to the parameter `string`.

On line 2, a ternary operation is evaluated. The `size` method is invoked on the string value referenced by the method local variable `string`, returning the integer object with value `11` and then a comparison operation is evaluated with left operand being the integer `11` and right operand integer `10`. The return value of the comparison operation evaluates to `true` and then the expression `string.upcase` is evaluated. The method `upcase` is called on the string value referenced by the `string` variable, returning a new string object `"HELLO WORLD"`, which is then passed as an argument of the `puts` method invocation, outputting it to the console.

The return value is `nil`.

## Ex2

Write a program that takes a number from the user between 0 and 100 and reports back whether the number is between 0 and 50, 51 and 100, or above 100.

```ruby
number = (0..101).to_a.sample

case
	when number <= 50 then puts "Number #{number} is between 0 and 50"
	when number <= 100 then puts "Number #{number} is between 51 and 100"
	else puts "Number #{number} is above 100"
end
```

**Code Explanation**

On line 1, the method `to_a` is called on the range object with value `(0..101)` returning an array object with elements from 0 to 101. The method `sample`is called on the array object and an integer object is returned, which is then assigned to the variable `number`.

On line 3 a `case` statement is employed. On line 4 a less than or equal to comparison operator is evaluated between the integer value referenced by the `number` variable and the integer `50`, if the expression evaluates as `true` the string object with value `"Number #{number} is between 0 and 50"` is passed as an argument to the `puts` method invocation, outputting it to the console.

On line 5, a less than or equal to comparison operator is evaluated between the integer value referenced by the `number` variable and the integer `100`, if the expression evaluates as `true` the string object with value `"Number #{number} is between 51 and 100"` is passed as an argument to the `puts` method invocation, outputting it to the console.

On line 6, if none of the previous expressions evaluate to `true`, the `puts` method is invoked and gets passed the string object with value `"Number #{number} is above 100"`, outputting it to the console.

## Ex3

```ruby
def equal_to_four(x)
	if x == 4
		puts "yup"
	else
		puts "nope"
	end
end

equal_to_four(5)
```

**Code explanation**

On line 9, the method `equal_to_four` us invoked and gets passed the integer object with value `5`.

From line 1-7, the method `equal_to_four` is defined. On line 2, an `if` statement is employed which checks the truthiness of `x == 4`. As this evaluates as `false`, the else statement is then executed and the string object with value `"nope"` is passed as an argument to the `puts` method invocation, outputting it to the console.


